---
layout: post
title: "2017 Resolutions - 3. Adopt Two-Factor Authentication"
title_short: "Adopt Two-Factor Authentication"
author: "Chapin, John C."
excerpt: >
  two-factor authentication, authenticating via something you know and something
  you have (or are), is a crucial strategy for securing your accounts,
  applications, and ultimately your personal data.
redirect_to: /
---

{{ page.excerpt }}

## 2016 was a landmark year in cybersecurity...

...for all the wrong reasons. The fallout related to poor information security
habits is still in the national news even after the end of the election cycle.
But don't make the mistake of thinking that you couldn't possibly become the
target of online criminal activity. You don't have to be a high-profile
politician, celebrity, or even do anything particularly remarkable to have
your personal information stolen. That's because criminal activity can now be
perpetrated on the scale and with the same ease as you reach thousands of
followers on social media networks.

That's why you should take the time right now to proactively put your account
security back in your hands, and adopt two-factor authentication (2FA).

## You've already used two-factor authentication

Whenever you go to an ATM, you have to provide your PIN after inserting a card
into the machine. The card is something your have. The PIN is something that you
know. Using an ATM involves a form of two-factor authentication. It's not hard,
and you know that it provides a measure of safety.

On the other hand, in order to get into your e-mail, file servers, and
applications with critical business information you're probably only using
something you know, a password. Some of you are using the same password for
multiple accounts. Even worse, some of you have an Excel document on your
system where you store all of the passwords and PIN information that cannot
share the same common password you like to use everywhere else.

## The risks are all around you

In the last year, we have seen plenty of bad passwords, stored insecurely, and
shared indiscriminately. What you don't see are the poor storage of credentials
on behalf of the website you just signed up for, the lack of encryption on your
company's blog, and the malware that is feeding information from your
accountant's computer to someone neither you nor your accountant knows is
looking at your data.

Adopting two-factor authentication doesn't mitigate all of these risks. But it's
a step in the right direction. Inputting a six-digit code when you access a
critical account takes a few extra seconds and means that someone a world away
is less likely to be able to login to the account.

## Who supports 2FA?

Check
<a href="https://twofactorauth.org" target="_blank">https://twofactorauth.org</a>
they have a fairly extensive list of businesses whose technology offerings
support two-factor authentication. They also help you notify institutions that
you're looking for them to adopt 2FA by providing links to Twitter and Facebook.

If your favorite bank, e-commerce site, or local government isn't on the list
still make sure to dig through your account settings and look for 2FA account
configuration options. Sometimes the option is present but not easy to find.

## Opt for hardware tokens and apps instead of SMS

In recently released documents from the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) they've made clear that SMS and voice call based 2FA are
possibly subject to interception.

    Due to the risk that SMS messages or voice calls may be intercepted or
    redirected, implementers of new systems SHOULD carefully consider
    alternative authenticators. If the out-of-band verification is to be made
    using the public switched telephone network (PSTN), the verifier SHALL
    verify that the pre-registered telephone number being used is not associated
    with a VoIP (or other software-based) service. It then sends the SMS or
    voice message to the pre-registered telephone number. Changing the
    pre-registered telephone number SHALL NOT be possible without two-factor
    authentication at the time of the change.

Instead of using SMS, if your provider allows you to use a program like
Google Authenticator or Authy, use those programs instead. If you're really
zealous about keeping your authentication codes secret, here are links to the
RFC documents describing [TOTP](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6238) and
[HOTP](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4226) algorithms:

## Wait, what about my company's software!

Of course, if you're a company with a custom web application we can help you and
your clients to further secure account authentication by adding in 2FA. It's
easier than you think and can be applied selectively so that users who are
concerned with security can adopt 2FA at their own pace.

<a href="mailto:sales@cts-llc.net?subject=I need two-factor authentication">Contact us to about enabling two-factor authentication in your software.</a>
